The world is changing so quickly. This
is probably a little bit obvious, but
you should just try things and and like
every day do something with AI. Last
summer, I took a weekend and used um
GPT5 to help me build an iPhone app. I
hadn't done that in a decade. And yeah,
it's so fast and so easy. And that was,
you know, an age ago. That was like 8
months ago. Uh now it's even faster and
easier. Don't limit yourself. like
anything that you imagine, you should
just try to use AI and see how far you
can get with it and you'll be, you know,
making the world better.
Welcome to another episode of the Light
Cone. Ian Fischer is the co-founder and
co-CEO of Poetic, which is building
recursively self-improving AI reasoning
harnesses for LLMs. Previously, he spent
a decade as a researcher at Google
DeepMind and founded a mobile devtools
company through YC years ago. Welcome,
Ian.
>> Thank you. I'm so happy to be here.
>> What is Poetic? How's it different than
RL? You know, how's it different than
context engineering?
>> At Poetic, what we're building is a
recursively self-improving system. And
so, recursive self-improvement is this
uh, you know, kind of the holy grail of
AI where the AI is making itself
smarter. The core insight that we had is
that uh we could do recursive
self-improvement far faster and cheaper
than all of the other ways that people
had been proposing to do this. Uh and so
obviously I'm I can't go into details
about what that what that is um what our
particular approach is but um most of
the approaches out there involve you
know they require you to train a new LLM
from scratch and training LLMs from
scratch costs you know hundreds of
millions of dollars and takes uh months
of effort and so the
>> and then anthropic or openi will come
along and just eat your lunch in the
next model release
>> right right and you know of course
anthropic and openi and google they're
exploring train recursive
self-improvement but typically at that
level of um having the you know having
to train a new model uh for every step
of self-improvement that they do.
>> I mean that seems like actually the like
defining thing that a startup really
really wants. Like I know that I want to
take advantage of whatever the next
model is, but the second you're in
fine-tuning land, I'm spending, you
know, millions to hundreds of millions
of dollars and then guess what? like it
I just lit it on fire cuz you know the
next version of the frontier model comes
out and I'll never catch up. Whereas
like working with your systems means
that I will always have the thing that
is uh better than the thing that's out
of box and that's sort of like the holy
grail.
>> Yeah, we think that this is uh
incredibly valuable to anybody who's
building on top of uh large language
models and we don't view the uh you know
the frontier models as competitors.
They're, you know, they're the ones that
were using the stilts, you know,
building stilts to stand on top of, but
uh if we didn't have that, um that
foundational layer, then, you know,
poetic couldn't exist.
>> Yeah. I mean, being the smartest model,
uh you know, it's a game of inches
actually and like so those inches matter
a lot,
>> right? Right.
>> How do we actually get started? I mean,
you've built something that, uh,
basically any startup could use that,
uh, it's sort of like stilts really. We
have built a system that um uh can
automatically generate systems for your
particular problem that will always
outperform the underlying language
models and without kind of the massive
expense as you're saying about the
bitter lesson where you know what would
you what would you have done without
poetic you probably would have said okay
we're going to first collect a large
data set you know like tens of thousands
of examples for our particular problem
that we're working on and we're going to
fine-tune you know the best model we can
put get our hands
uh maybe that's you know one of the
frontier models or maybe it's an open
weights model doesn't particularly
matter. you're going to spend a lot of
money on that fine-tuning. The the
compute is so expensive. Uh and then at
the end of it, you have something that
uh you know works better than the thing
that you fine-tuned on top of, but by
then a new model's come out and it's
better than the thing that you
fine-tuned. You know, you fine-tuned,
you know, like 3 years ago on top of GPT
3.5 or whatever and then GPD 404 comes
out and it just blows you out of the
water. And so, are you going to do that
again or are you going to go out of
business? And like in some cases the the
latter with poetic uh what we end up
giving you is a uh you know people are
calling these things harnesses now but
you know or a gentic system or whatever
you want to call it that sits on top of
one or more language models and it just
performs better than them. Uh and when
the new model comes out that same
harness is uh perfectly compatible with
it. Uh and you don't need to change
anything to get the uh you know an even
uh bigger performance bump.
Additionally, we can, you know, continue
to optimize for this new model, whatever
the new model is that you want to use,
uh, and, you know, make it even better.
Uh, but you, you don't lose out on, you
know, hundreds of millions of dollars.
In fact, we do this so much more
cheaply, uh, than fine-tuning would cost
as well.
>> And you've done this actually a bunch of
times, right? Like I remember when you
first came out with your paper in
December of last year, uh you shot to
the top of ARC AGI V2 and then you've
done this a bunch of times for other
benchmarks too. What you know what was
that like?
>> ARGI v2 was this was kind of you us
coming out of stealth letting people
know that we could um tackle these
really hard problems. Uh and in
particular, you know, we wanted to show
that our system could generate these um
what we call, you know, we call our
system like the poetic meta system can
generate uh reasoning systems that are
um highly effective. Gemini 3 had deep
think had just come out. Uh and they
were, you know, really quite uh
dramatically at the top of the
leaderboard at 45%. Uh and two days
later we release our results where um uh
we were showing that we could get uh a
lot higher than that. Uh
>> so they come out with soda and then you
come in right above them every single
time which is like wild to see honestly.
That's what it's like to have stilt you
know like whatever model comes out you
can be taller than that one with poetic
which is like that's so awesome.
>> Yeah. So the interesting thing is that
uh we were half the cost of Gemini 3
deep think because we were building on
top of Gemini 3 Pro which is a much
cheaper model um but we still got uh in
the end a 9 percentage point improvement
on the official verification. So they
were at 45% and we and like 70s
something dollars and we were at 54% and
$32 per problem.
>> So recently you guys just announced some
incredible results for humanity's last
exam. Can you tell us more about those?
>> Humanity's last exam is a a set of 2500
really really hard questions written by
experts in uh many different domains.
They're they're meant to be uh
challenging even for uh PhDs in those
fields. AI hasn't passed it yet. Uh but
we got to 55% which is almost two
percentage points higher than the the
previous uh state-of-the-art which came
out just last week uh from uh Anthropic
with Claude Opus 4.6. They got 53.1% and
we got 55% on it.
>> And one thing that uh humanity last exam
doesn't publish is the cost of getting
those results. In your case, this run
was done with less than around six
figure. How much was it?
>> We didn't publish any uh cost for this,
but I can say that the the optimization
costs us less than 100k. Yeah.
>> Which is impressive because each of
these big foundation modeled train runs
are in the hundreds of millions of
dollars. And you guys, as a company,
you're only seven people.
>> That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Seven uh seven
research scientists and research
engineers. Yeah.
>> That's impressive. And I think the thing
that's very interesting about your
approach is sort of taking a very
scientific approach to the emergent
behaviors that a lot of the best
founders are doing with models. I think
a lot of uh founders that get very good
results for agents, they treat the
underlying model as a common layer that
you can switch in between. And there's
certain tasks for example for GPD 5.2
two like very hard to verify bugs gets
sent to that versus architecture that
gets sent to claw 4.6 six, but you're
kind of doing this automatically instead
of having a human conducting is uh very
impressive. I think there's something
more special going on underneath. Can
you tell us a bit about how it works?
>> Yeah, it sounds magical. So, what can
you tell us?
>> Right. You're you're So, you're getting
at a core a really core thing. You know,
these harnesses, they are um code,
prompts, data, you know, built on top of
one or more language models, right? And
so this is something that in principle
you can build by hand um or with like
cloud code or whatever. But uh in in
practice it takes a lot of work to do
these to to you know have all the
insights uh to make this uh to make
these work well. And so the core
technology that we've developed at
poetic is uh recursive self-improvement.
So we we have a recursively
self-improving uh system which we call
the poetic meta system. the output of
that system is systems that solve hard
problems. Um where a hard problem is you
know something that you if you gave it
to GPT52
uh it would struggle to give you a
reliable robust result you know just to
use an example. So this is a a very big
advantage for us. We can generate these
systems in a much more automated manner.
uh which means that we can do it much
more quickly and much more cheaply than
if you hired a team yourself to try to
make um your own you know your own agent
to solve your particular task. But not
only that um since you know this is
really an automated optimization
process. If you already have done that
work you you know you're a you're a
startup that's like going after a
particular vertical and you've put
together you know you think you
understand your your problem pretty
well. You've put together your agent and
you you uh you know maybe it's working
pretty well but you know you can get
something better or you really need
something better. Um then you can bring
that to us uh and we can optimize uh
that entire agent or pieces of that
agent. So we could optimize just the
prompts, just the reasoning strategies.
Uh there's a lot of different things
that we can do uh depending on your
particular needs.
>> It sounds like this is a complete
different paradigm than RL because we
went through the scurve of regular
pre-training
RL with when OpenAI released 01 and now
this feels like a new one. It sounds
special. It sounds it rhymes a lot with
RNN's
>> which is a whole different paradigm than
than RL, right? It's going to depend on
the particular task, the particular type
of problem that we're going after that
we're trying to solve. Um, and the
underlying models that we're working
with. But, uh, effectively you could say
like each model or each set of models
that we're working with will have it
their own uh, scurve. The poetic system,
the poetic meta system itself is also
going to have its own scurve. And so as
the poetic meta system gets better and
as the underlying models get better, you
you'll find that the uh you know the
S-curve that you're dealing with keeps
shifting higher and higher until
ultimately either you saturate or like
>> reach AGI.
>> Yeah. Reach AGI, reach super
intelligences. Yeah.
>> Given its stilts, you might like hit the
ceiling first then.
>> That's the goal, right? Yeah,
>> you want to hit the ceiling first with
>> I think a lot of startups that we work
with um and then in my spare time I you
know do a bunch of context engineering
and then the thing is we're sort of like
tuning it tuning evals tuning like we're
context stuffing ourselves. What does
that even feel like to have a you know
recursively self-improving version of
like prompt engineering and context
engineering? we don't spend a lot of
time looking at the particular data that
we're working with. Uh instead, we're
letting the poetic meta system look at
that data and and so like the meta
system, you know, if it if it thinks
that it needs to put more things into
context, it do more context stuffing or
whatever, it'll it'll do that. If it
needs to like generate a bunch of
examples um uh to get the get better
performance, it'll do that for you,
right? It it was pretty interesting to
look at the um prompt outputs in
particular I'd say for ArcGI in that you
know I think you can read those and say
well that's not what a human would have
written uh pretty clearly and and it's
you know there's some unexpected stuff
and you know it made some really simple
examples and one of the examples is
actually wrong but we didn't change it.
We're like well this is you know this is
the thing that it output we'll just
leave it be. um you know we don't want
to go in and monkey around with things
and so historically in machine learning
you always you know is like the the rule
was you have to know your data set
really well um but now we're kind of
outsourcing that to the AI itself where
the AI is it's the AI's job to
understand the data set and figure out
where are the failure modes um and where
are the kind of robust reasoning
strategies that uh the model that that
the agent could uh use um to get better
performance.
>> How much of it is like much you the
output is much better prompts and then
how much of it is like the harness
itself uh context stuffing or
summarizing in the right way or
reranking in the right way so that like
you you have some number of like mega
LLM calls and then how do you get the
most out of um each of those calls?
>> Yeah. And so that definitely varies per
problem. But uh what we've seen, in
fact, our our last paper at DeepMind was
not doing this recursive self-improving
stuff, but we were um we were showing
that you could build these harnesses um
manually to solve really hard problems.
And what we saw is there is that uh you
know, we manually optimized the prompts
really hard for these very hard
problems. And that got us a little bit
of the way uh in this particular case.
you know the the hardest the hardest
task we were working on we got like to
5% performance with Gemini 1.5 flash
this was a while ago and then when we
added on the the reasoning strategies we
went from 5% to 95%
>> uh and so this is typically what we see
you know like everybody's out there kind
of doing some amount I wouldn't say
everybody but many people are out there
kind of doing some amount of automated
prop pro prompt optimization you know
Jeepa is this very popular paper
everybody's kind of implementing that
that will get you some performance
improvements, but it's very far from uh
everything that you can get uh if you
actually think about these reasoning
strategies that are really going to be
written in code rather than in in just
better prompts.
>> So if startups want to use poetic to put
their agent on stilts, what should they
do?
>> Yeah, so right now uh we haven't
released anything yet, but uh if you go
to poetic.ai, AI. Uh there is a button
you can click to get uh sign up for
early access. And if you're a startup uh
or a company who has a really hard
problem uh and you've tried everything
that you can to make it uh reliable and
robust and you just can't get all the
way there, you you need something more,
then uh let us know. We're looking for
problems like that. Uh so just tell us
tell us what it is that you're working
on and uh we'll reach out. You'll be the
first to know when we're when we're
ready to work with you. I mean, if
you're at the top of um humanity's last
exam, then I mean, that's that's pretty
big. So, it's you're all you're already
all the way out there at soda and then I
guess the stilts basically let any
agentic company become soda.
>> That's the idea. Yeah. Yeah. And you
know, we view the ArcGI results and the
humanities last exam results as showing
kind of two different uh capabilities
that we have. We can really improve your
reasoning and we can really improve uh
deep knowledge extraction uh from these
models
>> and then you're just totally vaccinated
against the bitter lesson.
>> Exactly.
>> YC's next batch is now taking
applications. Got a startup in you?
Apply at y combinator.com/apply.
It's never too early and filling out the
app will level up your idea. Okay, back
to the video.
>> Slight sort of change change of topic,
but something I was curious about. Uh so
you arrived at Google over a decade ago
when they acquired your first YC startup
at portable. A portable was it's porting
mobile apps crossplatform right like
Android or or whatever. It's quite
different to um recursive self-improving
AGI. Um how did you make that leap? What
happened once you got to Google? Um what
made you think that you maybe wanted to
shift out and do something different?
And just would love to hear that story.
the acquisition uh was this amazing
opportunity to um reflect on what I
really wanted to be doing next, right?
Like Google was in, you know, itself is
a place where you can do so many
different things. Uh so I spent some
time thinking about um where uh where I
wanted to go next in in uh in my
journey. I realized that the problems
that I was most excited about were
really actually AI and uh and robotics.
Um and the best people in the world,
many of them in those fields were at
Google at the time. Uh and so I went and
talked to them. they uh let me come join
you know a new AI robotics team uh in
Google research which was this amazing
opportunity for me since that wasn't my
background my background was like uh
computer security and then this
crossplatform mobile you know it's
systems building uh stuff I was able to
join this team and I I'll tell you the
truth that uh I very quickly realized
that uh hardware is hard uh and I didn't
really want to be doing robotics is more
aspirational at that moment
uh but I was really um uh passionate
about machine learning. So I just uh uh
made a very hard switch into just doing
machine learning research uh and did
that for you know about a decade at
Google and and then Google and then deep
mind.
>> What's maybe some advice that you have
today for engineers who want to get into
sort of more of the AI side probably the
applied AI and build startups around AI
like how should they think about that?
You know, the world is changing so
quickly. This is probably a little bit
obvious, but you should just try things
and and like every day uh do something
uh do something with AI. Always try to
push yourself to find the boundaries of
what they're capable of. Uh and uh and
build the things that you that you want
to build, right? Um, even even for me,
you know, last summer I took a weekend
and used um GPT5 to help me build an
iPhone app. I hadn't I hadn't done that
in a decade. So fast.
>> Yeah, it's so fast and so easy. And that
was, you know, that was an, you know, an
age ago. That was like eight months ago.
Uh, now it's even faster and easier.
Don't limit yourself. Like anything that
you imagine, you should just try to use
AI and see how far you can get with it
and you'll be, you know, making the
world better. That's all we have time
for today, but Ian, thank you so much
for giving us all Stilts. Uh, we can't
wait to use it at YC. I can't wait to
use it for Gary's list. I mean, there's
just so much to do. So,
>> yeah, thank you for having me. This was
a lot of fun.